---
id: news-20250425-focal-control
---
# Focal Control of Non-Invasive Deep Brain Stimulation Using Multipolar Temporal Interference (BEM)

Boris Botzanowski, Emma Acerbo, Sebastian Lehmann, Sarah L. Kearsley, [Melanie Steiner](https://itis.swiss/who-we-are/staff-members/all-staff/steiner-melanie/), [Esra Neufeld](https://itis.swiss/who-we-are/staff-members/project-leaders/esra-neufeld/), Florian Missey, Lyle Muller, Viktor Jirsa, Brian D. Corneil, and Adam Williamson, Bioelectronic Medicine 2025, Volume 11, Article number 7, online 27 March 2025, [doi: 10.1186/s42234-025-00169-6](https://bioelecmed.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s42234-025-00169-6)

Temporal interference (TI) is a method of non-invasive brain stimulation whereby transcutaneous electrodes are used to allow targeting and modulation of deeper brain structures not normally associated with non-invasive simulation, while avoiding unwanted stimulation of shallower cortical structures. The properties of TI have been previously demonstrated, however, the problem of decoupling stimulation focality from stimulation intensity has not yet been well addressed. This paper provides a possible novel solution, multipolar TI (mTI), which allows increased independent control over both the size of the stimulated region and the stimulation intensity. With the mTI method, multiple carrier frequencies are used to create multiple overlapping amplitude-modulated envelopes, rather than using one envelope as in standard TI. This study presents an explanation of the concept of mTI along with experimental data gathered from mice and rhesus macaques. The focality at depth in anesthetized mice and monkeys was improved, and – using the new focality in awake monkeys – targeted activity at depth in the superior colliculus was evoked. The mTI method could be an interesting and potentially useful new tool to apply alongside other forms of non-invasive brain stimulation.

Electric field simulations in this work were performed on the [Sim4Life](https://sim4life.swiss/) platform (ZMT Zurich MedTech AG) using the ‘stationary current solver, to model TI stimulation. A generic model of a rhesus macaque including over 350 different tissues was used from the IT’IS [ViZoo](https://itis.swiss/virtual-population/animal-models/animals/) database. The conductivities of the homogenous tissues were assigned according to IT’IS’s [database of tissue properties](https://itis.swiss/virtual-population/tissue-properties/overview/). IT’IS mechanistic research and computational modeling (validated in the present study through in vivo recordings) was fundamental in optimizing the stimulation conditions, achieving the necessary focality, and interpreting results.

The scientific and technical impact of the study can be summarized as:

* The use of multiple, well selected current channels and carrier frequencies to generate overlapping amplitude-modulated envelopes in mTI enables improved focality without compromising deep brain stimulation intensity

* The stimulation produced with mTI – by reducing the amplitude of each contributing envelope while maintaining the overall envelope amplitude at the target but varying off-target exposure – confines the effective stimulation to a smaller brain region and avoids unwanted off-target effects and scalp sensations
  
* The improved focality of mTI was validated in non-human primates as well as in mice, indicating that the method scales well across different brain sizes and anatomical geometries, suggesting potential for both preclinical research and clinical translation
  
* mTI was used to successfully evoke targeted neural activity in the superior colliculus, a deep brain structure critical for eye motion control, in awake primates without behavioral side effects or evidence of discomfort (e.g., scalp twitches, or blinking responses)

{{< modal-image Botzanowski-paper-TI-adding-2-frequencies.jpg >}} 
{{< /modal-image >}}

Fig. 1 - Principle of multipolar temporal interference and increased focality in non-human primates. A TI: Adding two frequencies to create an envelope – Two equal amplitude sinusoidal signals at 1975 Hz and 2025 Hz interact to create a 50 Hz amplitude modulated signal. B mTI: Adding two envelopes to create a greater envelope – The first 50 Hz envelope signal is created from the interaction of 1975 and 2025 Hz signals, the second from 2975 and 3025 Hz. When the two envelopes are added, a larger 50 Hz envelope is created. The maximum modulation occurs at the center of the circle (yellow area). C mTI: Reducing the amplitude to that of the original TI envelope increases focality – The amplitude from the electrode pairs is reduced to create an envelope amplitude equal to the original standard TI envelope with only two frequencies. The focality will increase compared to the standard TI, while maintain the AM maximum of the standard TI. D Classic TI and measurements a macaque monkey – 3D reconstruction of the skull of the macaque monkey (CT scan) with depth electrodes used to record the TI amplitude modulation. The region of strong amplitude modulation is found to be subcortical with TI using two high frequencies, but the focality is limited. Modulation index is calculated as follow MI = 1-(min/max)), also illustrated in Fig. 2A. Position of stimulation electrodes (skin) are shown as pink circles around the skull. Red arrow shows the contact of the electrode which recorded the maximum MI. E. mTI and measurements in a macaque monkey – The focality of the AM signal compared to D is improved with mTI using 8 frequencies to create 4 overlapping envelopes, where the amplitude from the pairs of carrier frequencies have been reduced to create an envelope with equal amplitude to D, which results in a more focal spatial profile. As in 1D, the position of stimulation electrode (skin) are shown as pink, blue, red and green circles around the skull. Red arrow shows the electrode which recorded the maximum MI.

[Read the full article here](https://bioelecmed.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s42234-025-00169-6)
